Added kubernetes exporter use-case (#134)
port-labs/port-docs: docs/complete-use-cases/full-kubernetes-exporter.md

---
sidebar_position: 7
---

# Mapping Kubernetes resources

Kubernetes has become one of the most popular ways to deploy microservice based applications. As the number of your microservices grow, and more clusters are deployed across several regions, it becomes complicated and tedious to keep track of all of your deployments, services, and jobs.

Using Port's Kubernetes Exporter, you can keep track of your K8s resources and export all of the data to Port. We will use K8s' built in metadata to create Entities in Port and keep track of their state.

## Prerequisites

> - [Terraform CLI](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/install-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Terraform CLI](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/install-cli);
```

- [Helm](https://helm.sh) must be installed to use the chart. Please refer to

>   Helm's [documentation](https://helm.sh/docs) to get started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Helm's [documentation](https://helm.sh/docs) to get started;
```

> - Create a `PORT_CLIENT_ID` and `PORT_CLIENT_SECRET` secrets in your Github Repo, to use in a Github Workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create `PORT_CLIENT_ID` and `PORT_CLIENT_SECRET` secrets in your Github Repo, to use in your Github Workflows.
```

:::tip

> All relevant files and resources for this guide are available [here!](https://github.com/port-labs/port-k8s-exporter)

Reviewer: Fix repo URL, also make the repo URL more distinct

> All relevant files and resources for this guide are available [here!](https://github.com/port-labs/port-k8s-exporter)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All relevant files and resources for this guide are available [**here!**](https://github.com/port-labs/port-k8s-exporter)
```

:::

## Setting up your Blueprints

### Creating Blueprints with Terraform

To set up your Blueprints, use Port's [Terraform provider](../api-providers/terraform.md).

> After setting up your `main.tf` file under the `terraform/` directory, create the required `.tf` files, which will represent your Port Blueprints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up your `main.tf` file under the `terraform/` directory, create the required `.tf` files, which will represent your Port Blueprints.

:::tip
Be sure to use the example repository listed above for a complete example of the structure and base file contents required to implement this use case.
:::
```

In the Git repository, you can find 10 `.tf` files which will create the following Blueprints:

- Cluster
- ClusterRole
- CronJob
- Deployment
- Namespace
- Node
- Pod
- PodOwner \*
- Role
- Service \*

:::note

> `PodOwner` is an abstraction of Kubernetes objects which create and manage pods. By creating this Blueprint, we don't need a Blueprint per Pod Owner type, which will likely look pretty similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PodOwner` is an abstraction of Kubernetes objects which create and manage pods. By creating this Blueprint, we can avoid creating a dedicated Blueprint per Pod Owner type, all of which will likely look pretty similar.
```

:::

### Updating Blueprints using Github Workflows

Now that you have set your foundations for managing your Blueprints using Terraform, let's make it automatic.

Create the following workflow:

```yaml showLineNumbers
name: Update Port Blueprints

on:
  push:
    paths:
      - "terraform/*.tf"

jobs:
  update-port-blueprints:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          persist-credentials: true
      - uses: hashicorp/setup-terraform@v2
      - name: Apply tf Blueprints
        env:
          PORT_CLIENT_ID: ${{ secrets.PORT_CLIENT_ID }}
          PORT_CLIENT_SECRET: ${{ secrets.PORT_CLIENT_SECRET }}
        run: |
          cd terraform/
          terraform init
          terraform apply -auto-approve
```

This workflow will monitor file changes under `terraform/*.tf`, and on a change the workflow will run and apply the new or changed Blueprints to Port.

## Exporting your Kubernetes cluster

### Set up the Kubernetes exporter

> Now it is time to populate you Port environment with entities using Port's Kubernetes Exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it is time to populate you Port environment with Entities using Port's Kubernetes Exporter.
```

:::tip
Get to know the basics of our Kubernetes exporter [here!](../exporters/k8s-exporter/quickstart.md)
:::

Create a `config.yaml` with your relevant queries and Blueprints.
In the Git repository under `exporter-config/config.yaml`, you can find a pre-made `config.yaml` which is configured to match the Blueprints we created earlier using Terraform. This `config.yaml` maps resources from all of the namespaces which dont start with "kube", and some cluster-scope resources.

### Updating the exporter using Github Workflows

> You can keep your exporter `config.yaml` up to date using a Github Workflow. On change, we want the `config.yaml` to update in your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep the mapping of cluster resources to Port up-to-date. You can use a GitHub Workflow to update the `config.yml` file applied to your K8s cluster whenever you make an update. On change to the `config.yml` file, the GitHub workflow will update the K8s exporter config deployed to your cluster.
```

> This can be achieved the following workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by using the following workflow:
```

          version: "v1.24.0" # default is latest stable
      - name: Configure AWS Credentials 🔒
        id: aws-credentials
        uses: aws-actions/configure-aws-credentials@v1
        with:
          aws-access-key-id: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          aws-secret-access-key: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
          aws-region: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
      - name: Update Exporter
        env:
          AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
          AWS_DEFAULT_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
          AWS_DEFAULT_OUTPUT: json
        run: |
          aws eks update-kubeconfig --name ${{ secrets.EKS_CLUSTER_NAME }}

          helm repo add port-labs https://port-labs.github.io/helm-charts
          helm repo update

          helm upgrade my-port-k8s-exporter port-labs/port-k8s-exporter \
          --create-namespace --namespace port-k8s-exporter \
          --set secret.secrets.portClientId=${{ secrets.PORT_CLIENT_ID }} --set secret.secrets.portClientSecret=${{ secrets.PORT_CLIENT_SECRET }} \
          --set-file configMap.config=./exporter-config/config.yaml --install
```

> This workflow will test for changes in the `exporter-config/config.yaml` file, and change will run and update the Kubernetes exporter deployed to your cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This workflow will check for changes in the `exporter-config/config.yaml` file, whenever a change occurs the updated Kubernetes exporter config will be deployed to your cluster.
```

## Summary

> In this use-case, you achieved a fully GitOps method for exporting data from a Kubernetes cluster to Port, using Port's K8s Exporter and Terraform provider. Now you will be able to view information such as replica counts for your deployments, node readiness and job run statuses, from Port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this use-case, you achieved a fully GitOps method for exporting data from a Kubernetes cluster to Port, using Port's K8s Exporter and Terraform provider. Now you have a comprehensive mapping of your Kubernetes cluster in Port, which updates in real-time according to the state of your Kubernetes cluster. Now you will be able to view information such as replica counts for your deployments, node readiness and job run statuses, directly from Port.
```

This can be achieved by using the following workflow:

```yaml showLineNumbers
name: Update K8s Exporter

on:
  push:
    paths:
      - "exporter-config/config.yaml"
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  update-k8s-exporter:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
        with:
          persist-credentials: true
      - uses: azure/setup-helm@v3
        with:
          token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }} # only needed if version is 'latest'
      - uses: azure/setup-kubectl@v3
        with:
          version: "v1.24.0" # default is latest stable
      - name: Configure AWS Credentials 🔒
        id: aws-credentials
        uses: aws-actions/configure-aws-credentials@v1
        with:
          aws-access-key-id: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          aws-secret-access-key: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
          aws-region: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
      - name: Update Exporter
        env:
          AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ${{ secrets.AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID }}
          AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ${{ secrets.AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY }}
          AWS_DEFAULT_REGION: ${{ secrets.AWS_REGION }}
          AWS_DEFAULT_OUTPUT: json
        run: |

>           # Replace this command with your method of fetching the kubeconfig file for your cluster

Reviewer: Replace this block with `// highlight-next-line` and add a note admonition below the block
